 It was because he dedicated his whole life to the service of the motherland and service of humanity.

 The strict discipline of his father the religious bent of mind of his mother all influenced Gandhiji greatly.

 He was mortally afraid of the dark of ghosts and spirits and also of snakes and scorpions.

 In the beginning he did not like some of the subjects that were taught to him but with encouragement from his teachers he studied them and began to enjoy them.

 Seeing Mohans hesitation the teacher made a sign behind the Inspectors back that he should copy the word from his neighbours slate.

 He decided to make a clean breast of everything to his father but he lacked the courage to face him.

 Everyone in the family decided that he should go to England and become a Barrister so that on his return he could become a Dewan like his father.

 However he studied the Bible Geeta and Quran and came to the conclusion that the principle tenets in all religions are the same.

 Eagerly he looked forward to meeting his mother and giving her the good news but he was to be sorely disappointed.

 Since all the power was in the hands of the English people Gandhiji realised that to fight them it was necessary to use an entirely different method.

 The British won the war and taking into consideration the help Gandhiji had rendered to them they gave the Indians more privileges.

In the meantime all over India agitations and uprisings against the British rule where on the increase.

 Since it had been decided that the freedom struggle would not stop until full freedom was granted the negotiations did not serve any purpose.

 The Government with the help of the police and the army tried its best to put an end to all these demonstrations and agitations but these were unsuccessful.

 The British Government realised that it was now impossible for them to continue their rule in India They released Gandhiji and other leaders from prison and once again began negotiations with him.

 He went from village to village and advised the people that for the good of the country it was necessary for everyone to work together in unity and harmony.

 Not only India but the whole world mourned the death of the great man  a real Mahatma who had dedicated his entire life to the service of humanity and had taught the importance of truth brotherhood peace non violence equality and simplicity.


